This is the Music Explaura - a web application that is designed to
help you discover new music.  Let me show you how it works.

Lately I've been listening to 'Jimi Hendrix' - so let me search for
Jimi Hendrix in the explaura.  

[search]

Context is important when looking for new music - the more information
you can find about an artist, the better your chances are for making a
good decision about whether or not you'll like the artist. The music
explaura has collected info about Jimi Hendrix from all over the web and
presents it all in one page.

First there's the tag cloud for Jimi Hendrix - this shows the tags that
listeners have applied to Jimi Hendrix - tags like emo, alternative, geek
rock, indie. The Explaura weights the tags so that the most
discriminating tags are emphasized.  A larger font indicates a tag
that is more descriptive.

Next is an artist biography from the Wikipedia. If we want more info,
we can click on this more button which will take us straight to the
wikipedia.

Next are a set of Youtube videos featuring Jimi Hendrix [play one]
We have flickr photos of the band.  [show one] Albums released by the band
[continue to scroll] and upcoming concerts.

[scroll back up to the top]

The Music Explaura also gives me a list of similar artists to Jimi
Hendrix.  If I like Jimi Hendrix I might like one of these artists.
Now most music recommenders will use the wisdom of the crowds to
give you recommendations.  One problem with these types of recommendations
is that they can't offer any detailed explanation about why something
was recommended beyond the superficial "people who bought X also
bought Y".  The Explaura creates recommendations in a different
way, instead of relying on the wisdom of the crowds, the explaura
finds similar artists based upon how well their tag clouds overlap.
Here's a list of artists that are similar to Hendrix based upon how
well their tag clouds overlap.

One advantage of generating recommendations based on overlapping
tag clouds is that we can use the overlapping tags to help explain
why a recommendation was made. For example, because I like Jimi
Hendrix, I am being recommended 'The Doors'.  A traditional recommender
would not be able to explain this recommendation beyond saying 'people
who listen to Jimi Henrix also listen to the doors'.  With the Music
Explaura we can ask 'why'. When I click on the 'why?' for the Doors the
music explaura shows a tag cloud  containing the common tags that Jimi
Hendrix and the doors share.  The larger the tag, the stronger the
overlap.  Here we see that the tags 'classic rock', 'psychedelic rock'
and 'blues', and 70s dominate the common tags. 

When we look at the 'why cloud' for a different artist such as Santana, we see
a different tag cloud. 'Guitar virtuoso' is much more important, while
'pyschedelic rock' is less important.

By using the overlapping tag clouds to drive artist similarity not only
do we get good recommendations, we get explainable recommendations. By
looking at how the tag clouds of two items overlap we can explain why an
item was recommended.

We can take this idea one step further, we can use the tags not only to
explain the recommendations, but also to steer the recommendations. Let
me show you how.

For example, the reason I like Jimi Hendrix is because of his guitar
playing. I'm actually not a big fan of 60s pyschedelia - so I'd like to
steer the recommendations more toward guitar virtuosity and away from 60s
psychedelia.  I can do this with the music explaura. Starting from the
Jimi Hendrix page, I can click on this 'steering wheel' - this will bring
us to the 'steering' page.  In the center of the page, we see the top 10
most discriptive tags for Jimi Hendrix.  On the right we see more tags
that have been applied to Jimi Hendrix. On the left we see a list of
artists that best match the tag cloud.  Since I'm interested in
guitar, I can grab the guitar virtuos tag and grow  it 
- when I do this the list of recommendations is immediately
updated to find the artists that best match the tag cloud.   Now our
recommendations emphasize guitar playing - lets listen to some.  Eric,
Joe Gary - and Robin Trower.
